
# Locomotive Plugins [![Build Status](https://secure.travis-ci.org/colibri-software/locomotive_plugins.png)](https://travis-ci.org/colibri-software/locomotive_plugins)

This gem is used to develop plugins for [Locomotive
CMS](http://locomotivecms.com/). Plugins can be enabled or disabled on each
site individually.


## Installation

To create a Locomotive Plugin, create a ruby gem and then install this gem:

    gem install locomotive_plugins

Alternatively if you're using Bundler, add the following line to your Gemfile:

    gem 'locomotive_plugins'

and run `bundle install`.

To install the plugin in LocomotiveCMS, simply [create a LocomotiveCMS
app](http://doc.locomotivecms.com/guides/get-started/install-engine), ensuring
you have all of the [Requirements](http://doc.locomotivecms.com/guides/get-started/requirements) installed, and add your
plugin gem to the app's Gemfile in the `locomotive_plugins` group:

    group(:locomotive_plugins) do
      gem 'my_plugin'
      gem 'another_plugin'
    end


## Usage

To create a plugin, create a class which includes the `Locomotive::Plugin`
module:

    class BasicAuth
      include Locomotive::Plugin
    end

The plugin class will automatically be registered under an ID which is its
underscored name, in this case, `basic_auth`. To register it under a different
ID, simply override the class level method `default_plugin_id`:

    class BasicAuth
      include Locomotive::Plugin

      def self.default_plugin_id
        'auth'
      end
    end

See the sections below for usage examples of the various features. Also, see
the
[documentation](http://rubydoc.info/github/colibri-software/locomotive_plugins/).

### Initialization

There are two methods which can be overridden to customize the initialization
process. The class method `plugin_loaded` is called after the rails app first
loads the plugin. The `initialize` method may also be overridden in order run
custom code when the plugin object is constructed. Note that the `initialize`
method must not take any arguments.

    class MyPlugin
      include Locomotive::Plugin

      def self.plugin_loaded
        # Initial initialization code (only called once)
      end

      def initialize
        # Plugin object initialization code. This is called before each request
        # for which this plugin is needed
      end
    end

### Callbacks

A plugin may use ActiveModel callbacks. Currently, two callbacks are supported:
`page_render` and `rack_app_request`, both allowing `before`, `around`, and
`after` callbacks. The `page_render` callbacks are called for all enabled
plugins when a public-facing liquid page in LocomotiveCMS is rendered. The
`rack_app_request` callbacks are called for a specific plugin when a request is
about to be handed to its rack app (see the section below on including a Rack
app in the plugin).  The `page_render` callbacks have access to the controller
which is being invoked, and both callback types have access to the config
variable which is set within the Locomotive UI.

    class BasicAuth
      include Locomotive::Plugin

      before_page_render :authenticate

      def authenticate
        if self.config[:use_basic_auth]
          self.controller.authenticate_or_request_with_http_basic do |username, password|
            username = USER_ID && password == PASSWORD
          end
        end
      end
    end

### Liquid

Plugins have the ability to add liquid drops, tags, and filters to
LocomotiveCMS. These liquid objects will only be accessible to sites which have
enabled the plugin. All liquid objects have access to
`@context.registers[:plugin_object]` which supplies the plugin object. This
gives access to the config hash and other plugin methods.

#### Drops

A plugin can add a liquid drop which can be accessed from page templates in
LocomotiveCMS. To do so, override the `to_liquid` method.

Plugin code:

    class BasicAuth
      include Locomotive::Plugin

      def to_liquid
        BasicAuthDrop.new(self.get_authenticated_user_id)
      end
    end

    class BasicAuthDrop < ::Liquid::Drop
      def initialize(userid)
        @userid = userid
      end

      def userid
        @userid
      end
    end

Liquid code:

    <p>Your User ID is: {{ plugins.basic_auth.userid }}</p>

This liquid code assumes that the plugin has been registered under the default
ID as described above.

#### Filters

A plugin can add liquid filters:

    module Filters

      def add_http(input)
        if input.start_with?('http://')
          input
        else
          "http://#{input}"
        end
      end

    end

    class MyPlugin
      include Locomotive::Plugin

      def self.liquid_filters
        Filters
      end
    end

Locomotive will automatically prefix the filter with the plugin ID in the
liquid code:

    <a href="{{ page.link | my_plugin_add_http }}">Click here!</a>

#### Tags

A plugin may also supply custom liquid tags. The custom tag class may override
the `render_disabled` method to specify what should be rendered if the plugin
is not enabled. By default, this will be the empty string. For example:

    # Note that Liquid::Block is a subclass of Liquid::Tag
    class Paragraph < Liquid::Block
      def render(context)
        "<p>#{render_all(@nodelist, context)}</p>"
      end

      def render_disabled(context)
        render_all(@nodelist, context)
      end
    end

    class Newline < Liquid::Tag
      def render(context)
        "<br />"
      end
    end

    class MyPlugin
      include Locomotive::Plugin

      def self.liquid_tags
        {
          :paragraph => Paragraph,
          :newline => Newline
        }
      end
    end

Locomotive will automatically prefix the tag with the plugin ID in the liquid
code. Consider the following liquid code:

    {% my_plugin_paragraph %}Some Text{% endmy_plugin_paragraph %}
    Some Text{% my_plugin_newline %}

When `MyPlugin` is enabled, the code will be rendered to:

    <p>Some Text</p>
    Some Text<br />

When `MyPlugin` is disabled, the code will be rendered to:

    Some Text
    Some Text

### Config UI

Plugins can provide a UI for setting configuration attributes. The UI should be
written as a [Handlebars.js](http://handlebarsjs.com/) template. When the
template is rendered, it is supplied with the array of content types in the
CMS. This can be used, for example, to create a select box for selecting a
content type to be acted upon by the plugin.

A config UI can be specified by a plugin in a few ways. The preferred method is
to override the  `config_template_file` method on the plugin class. This method
must return a path to an HTML or HAML file. For more fine-grained control over
how the string is generated, the `config_template_string` can be overridden to
directly supply the HTML string to be rendered.

Here's an example of an HTML config file:

    <li>
      <label name="my_plugin_config">My Plugin Config</label>
      <input type="text" name="my_plugin_config">
      <p class="inline-hints">My Hint</p>
    </li>
    <li>
      <label name="content_type_slug">Content Types</label>
      <select name="content_type_slug" multiple="multiple">
        {{#each content_types}}
        <option value="{{ this.slug }}"> {{ this.name }}</option>
        {{/each}}
      </select>
    </li>
    <li>
      <label name="do_awesome_thing">Do the awesome thing?</label>
      <input type="checkbox" name="do_awesome_thing">
    </li>

The values of the input fields in this form will be put into the plugin
object's config hash. Any input coming from a checkbox field will be saved as a
boolean value, and other input fields will be saved as strings. The keys for
the hash are taken from the `name` attribute of each input field. So, if in the
previous example, the "My Plugin Config" field is filled with "Config Value", a
content type with slug "my\_content\_type" is selected, and the checkbox is
checked, the config hash will be as follows:

    {
      "my_plugin_config" => "Config Value",
      "content_type_slug" => "my_content_type",
      "do_awesome_thing" => true
    }

### Database Models

Plugins can persist data in Locomotive's database through the use of Database
Models. A Database Model is simply a Mongoid document which is managed by
Locomotive CMS. To allow your model to be managed by Locomotive CMS you must
use Locomotive::Plugins::Document instead of Mongoid::Document. For example:

    class VisitCount
      include Locomotive::Plugins::Document
      field :count, default: 0
    end

    class VisitCounter
      include Locomotive::Plugin

      before_filter :increment_count

      def increment_count
        visit_count.count += 1
        visit_count.save!
      end

      protected

      def visit_count
        @visit_count ||= (VisitCount.first || VisitCount.new)
      end
    end

Note that the plugin databases that use the Locomtive::Plugins::Document are
isolated between Locomotive site instances. In other words, if a plugin is
enabled on two sites, A and B, and a request comes in to site A which causes
a Mongoid Document to be saved to the database, this document will not be
accessible to the plugin when a request comes in to site B. Thus plugin
database models should be developed in the context of a single site, since
each site will have its own database. If you require a database model the is
avaiable to all sites then you can do so by using a regualar Mongoid::Document.

### JS3 (JavaScript on the Server Side)

JS3 was developed to provide a secure way to allow inter-plugin communication.
It allows a plugin developer to provide methods and variables to any other
plugin contained in a sandbox. For instance if you have a plugin A that
provides user accounts and a plugin B the restricts access to a configured path
then you may want to be able to access the accounts on plugin A from plugin B.
To do this you would have to do the following.

Plugin A: allow plugins to access users.

In the plugin definition add the following:

    def self.javascript_context
      {
        users: Locomotive::Plugins::Variable.new { Users.all }
      }
    end

Plugin B:

You have a few options here. You can access the users from ruby by doing the
following:

    plugin_object.js3_context['plugin_a_users']

This will return a mongoid criteria the you can do what you want with. If you
want the restrictions to be variable by site the you could add a javascript
block to the config and then run that javascript code on the js3 context.

    plugin_object.js3_context.eval(config['javascript_block'])

You can also add other methods or variable to the context that you want only
your plugin to have access to, each time you call js3_context you will get a
new object. To find out more take a look at the gem
['therubyracer'](https://github.com/cowboyd/therubyracer).

### Rack App

Plugins can supply a Rack Application to be used for request handling. Do so by
overriding the `rack_app` class method in the plugin class. The Rack app
will be given some helper methods which can be called while it is handling a
request:

* `plugin_object`: retrieve the plugin object.
* `full_path(path)`: generate the full url path for `path`. The `path` variable
  is a url path relative to the mountpoint of the Rack app.
* `full_url(path)`: generate the full url for `path`. The `path` variable is a
  url path relative to the mountpoint of the Rack app.

The `full_path` and `full_url` helpers may be used by the Rack app to generate
full paths and urls without explicit knowledge of the Rack app's mountpoint.
This is important since Locomotive will mount the app to a path based on its
`plugin_id`.

The plugin object also has helpers which can be called whether or not the
current request is being handled by a Rack app. These are helpful when a plugin
needs to use a path or URL which would be handled by the Rack app, for example,
to generate a link.

* `rack_app_full_path(path)`: generate the full url path for `path`. Same as
  `full_path(path)` above.
* `rack_app_full_url(path)`: generate the full url for `path`. Same as
  `full_url(path)` above.

If your `rack_app` method creates and returns a new object instance, call the
`mounted_rack_app` method on the plugin object or the plugin class to get the
instance which is mounted in the rails app.
